UCSC CSE 134 Embedded Operating Systems | Keith Irby | Project 1

## Part 1 

### usage: 

To use the interactive pintos shell call this command: 

```pintos --```

### New functions

In total 4 functions were created for creating a kernel embedded CLI in pintos. 

1) `void run_inter_shell(void)`

Main event loop function that handles calling all the other functions in the correct order for handling user input to the interactive CLI.

Returns nothing.

2) `int read_shell(char *buff, int max_size)`

Reads the user input and outputs it back to them in the interactive shell. 

Returns the size the user input to the interactive shell. 

3) `char **cheap_argparse(char *p, int size);`

A low cost function for creating a argv list from the user input to help finding commands the user typed easier.

Returns a list of strings that contains all the commands and arguments specified in the ineteractive shell from the user.

4) int `check_for(char **argv, char *check_str)`

Compares a argv list to a specfied string `check_str` passed as parameter and returns true or false in the form of an integer. 

1 = check_str found

2 = check_str NOT found

### Synchronization

No synchronization primitives were used in this part.

### Design Justification

To make sure the interactive shell is embedded into the pintos kernel everything was coded in the `/pintos/src/threads/init.c` file, which on the command `make -j` in the same folder will compile the interactive shell into the kernel.

To start the main event function is `run_inter_shell(void)` which is called from the `int pintos_init(void)` function. We call from here because everytime the `pintos` command is called this function is called, and with an if/else statement checking that no arguments had been specified we choose to run the interactive shell. Once the shell is finished on the call to exit we return back to the `pintos_init(void)` function and call the `shutdown()` and `thread_exit()` functions. 

- int pintos_init(void) Algorithm (Important portions)
```
1) Pintos boot start
2) call pintos_init(void)
3) read command line into argv
4) parse command line back into argv
5.1) if argv != nothing figure out the command line actions and run 
5.2) else run the interactive shell 
6) shutdown OS
7) exit threads
```

Once we are in the `run_inter_shell()` function some initial variables are set like the max command line buffer size, the buffer itself, a few boolean statements, and command supported as string. Then we enter the main event loop. 

- void run_inter_shell() Algorithm
```
1) Define initial variables
1.1) define max buffer size 
1.2) define input buffer as a character array 
1.3) define pointer to argv 
1.4) define boolean for exit command found 
1.5) define boolean for if any other command is found
1.6) define what the exit command looks like as a string 
1.7) define what the whoami string looks like as a string

2) enter the main event loop, exits when exit command found
3) print the "CSE134>" terminal starter 
4) run read_shell function, returns number of characters user input
5) argparse the user input into a list of strings 
6) check for exit command
7.1) if exit not found check if whoami command found 
7.2) if whoami command found printf user ID
7.3) if whoami not found print Invalid command

8) If exit command found, exit the main event loop and return to pintos_init() function
```

The first major function used by the main event while loop is `int read_shell(char *buff, int max_size)`. This function reads from the command line and outputs the users commands back to them. It does not have backspace or cursor support.

- int read_shell(char *buff, int max_size) Algorithm
```
1) Define initial variables like what a enter key is, character holder, and counter

2) Enter our main I/O event while loop
3) on keyboard input store it into input variable
4) print the char to the command line for the user 
5) buffer the user input char
6) Add to the buffer size variable i
7) on finding the enter key exit or hitting the max size exit, otherwise continue

8) once while loop finished print a newline character
9) prepare buffer string with a null terminator 
10) return the size of the user input
```

After the previous function we now have the users input buffered and we need to make it useful. To do this we use the `char **cheap_argparse(char *p, int size)` function. This function converts the buffer by tokenizing each command by a space and then storing them into a list of strings. 


- `char **cheap_argparse(char *p, int size)` Algorithm
```
1) Using a for loop count the number of spaces in the buffered user input (this should give a estimate to the number of commands and options)
2) Allocate memory for the list of strings using the # of spaces found previously 
3) Tokenize the buffered user input by spaces
4) return the list of strings argv
```

After this we go onto checking the commands found. It should be noted if a exit command is found anywhere from the user input that will be prioritized first and cause the program to exit. To check for these commands we use the function `int check_for(char **argv, char *check_str)`.

- `int check_for(char **argv, char *check_str)` Algorithm
```
1) Use a for loop on each element in argv
2) Use strcmp to see if check_str is found
2.1) If not found continue or exit and return 0 for not found 
2.2) If found return 1 for true
```

The above function is first used to check for the exit command, if it isnt found we then check for the `whoami` command. If neither are found or the `whoami` is found and we output the correct option for that we continue running the interactive shell.ß

-------------------------------------

## Part 2 

#### Data structures

For part 2 the only data structure changed was `struct thread{}`. The modification was done to header.h and is: 
```
int64_t ticks_sleep; // # of ticks the thread needs to sleep 
```

#### Synchronization 
While no synchronization primitives are used the interrupts had to be modified. This was done because sleeping threads using while already using a overhead timer that has interrupts is diffcult with locks, condition variables, and semaphores.  

#### Design Justification

The first major modification is in `void timer_sleep(int64_t ticks)`. It was changed to remove the busy wait. 

-`void timer_sleep(int64_t ticks)` Algorithm 
```
1) Check that interrupts are turned on
2) get the current tick time 
3) add the current tick time + ticks from the function to a new variable added for threads called `ticks_sleep`
4) disable interrupts
5) block the thread
6) enable interrupts
```

The `timer_sleep()` function was modified this way to allow for a thread to enter it and sleep for a certain number of ticks without busy waiting like the previous version. It acomplishes this by using the blockingthe thread to force it to sleep.

But how do the threads wake up once they hit their specific tick time? That is partly done with the help of `timer_interrupt()` function. This function is called everytime the tick needs to go up by 1, once called we use the `thread_foreach(check_thread_sleep, 0)` to check each threads tick to wakeup from sleep (`ticks_sleep`) to the current tick amount. 


