Your design
document should include a separate section for each of the four other tasks (argument parsing, system calls, process termination message, and user memory). 

For each section, you should outline 
(1) any data structures that you created or extended in your design; 
(2) any algorithms that you created for your design; 
(3) any synchronization used in your design;
(4) a justification of your design (Why is it correct? Why is it fast? etc.).


You should aim to have enough detail in your design that a fellow 134 student would be capable of re-implementing your system by following it. Note: if your design does not require any of these features (e.g., you do not have data structures for the process termination message)
specify “N/A”.


# Project 2

## Argument Parsing

### 1) Data structures created/extended
##### struct thread
```
  {
    tid_t tid; 
    .....
    // NEW: exit status code
    int exit_status; 

    // NEW: thread file list
    struct list list_files;
    int fd_ct;
    
    
    // NEW: Used for communicating between parent and children threads
    struct thread *parent;
    struct semaphore sem_child_load;   // Sem forcing parent thread to wait on a child to load
    struct semaphore sem_child_wait;   // Sem forcing the parent thread to wait on child 
    struct list child_list;            // List of children threads 
    int child_loaded;                  // Flag saying if the child loaded 
    int child_done;                    // Flag saying if the child finished its task
    tid_t child_waiting;               // Child the thread is waiting on 

    /* Owned by thread.c. */
    unsigned magic;                     /**< Detects stack overflow. */
  };

```
The first data structure extended was the `struct thread` so that it could support children processes.

The first major addtion was `struct thread *parent`. Having a internal pointer inside a thread to its parent was doen to allow a child thread to modify the parents child flags and child semaphores. Without the internal pointer to the parent thread the child has no way to communicate with the parent when it has finished loading its program or has finished its execution of its own program. 

The next two major additons are the semaphores `sem_child_load` and `sem_child_wait`. The first semaphores job is to force the parent thread to wait in `process.c` function `process_execute()` until the child threads program has loaded. The second semaphore, `sem_child_wait`, job is to force the parent thread to wait in `process.c` function `process_wait()` until the child thread has accomplished its program task or failed.

Another important additon to `struct thread` is the `tid_t child_waiting` element. This was addded so the parent thread doesnt wait on any thread that calls on its semaphores and instead the parent thread only waits on `child_waiting` in `process_wait`. Also the `child_done` flag is used to let the parent thread know the child thread has finished its program.

The last addition to `struct thread` is `struct child_list` which holds a list of `struct child`. The list is created to help the parent thread know if it should be waiting on children if it has any or move onto something else in later portions of the code. 


##### struct child 
```
// NEW: struct type to allow for threads to have children process threads
struct child{
   tid_t tid;                      // Child threads identifier
   struct list_elem child_elem;    // list element of child
   int child_ret;                  // childs return value 
}; 
```

`struct child` data structure was created to help the parent thread/process coordinate with a child thread/process. The first internal element it has is `tid_t tid` which is used by the parent thread to know what children threads are its and if it should wait on certain tids passed to it. The second element `struct list_elem child_elem` is a list element so the `struct child` can be added as a element in `struct thread` list `struct list child_list`. The last element `int child_ret` is used by a parent thread to return a child threads exit status, i.e know if it failed or has a special exit status it needs send back.


### 2) Algorithms

##### tid_t process_execute (const char *file_name) 
```

Sure, here's the pseudo code in plain English:

1.  Start executing the process_execute function.
2.  Allocate memory for a copy of the file_name argument to prevent race conditions between the caller 
and the load() function.
3.  If memory allocation fails, return an error indicating failure to create a thread.
4.  Copy the file_name argument into the allocated memory.
5.  Create a new child thread to execute the program specified by file_name (using create_thread will 
be added to caller threads child_list)
6.  If thread creation fails, free the allocated memory and return an error tid from thread_create()
7.  Wait for the new thread (child process) to finish loading the executable on sem_child_load
8.  Check if the child thread successfully loaded the executable. If not, handle the failure by removing 
the child thread from the list of children, freeing its resources, and return TID_ERROR.
9.  If the child thread loaded successfully, return its thread identifier (TID) (into process_wait() soon).
10. End of process_execute function.
```

`process_execute()` is the first function algorithm modified. Its job is to create the child thread, add the child thread to its own child list and wait for it load. Once the child thread has tried to load the parent thread in `process_execute()` can deallocate the child or head `into process_wait()` and wait for the child thread to finish its program (controlled by `sem_child_wait`).


##### void start_process (void *file_name_)
```
1.   Begin executing the start_process function.
2.   Extract the file_name from the passed argument and initialize variables.
3.   Parse the command line string to separate the program name and its arguments.
3.1  If unable to parse the program name, exit the function.
4.   Allocate memory for the program arguments.
5.   If memory allocation fails, handle the error (exit the thread).
6.   Add the program name as the first element of the arguments list.
7.   Parse the remaining tokens (arguments) and add them to the arguments list.
7.1  Check if the total size of arguments exceeds the maximum allowed size along the way.
8.   Null-terminate the arguments list.
9.   Initialize the interrupt frame and load the executable.
10.  Set the child_loaded flag for the parent thread that started the user program.
10.1 If the child loaded succesfully continue onto the interrupt
10.2 If the child did not load, tell the parent, unlock the parent, and exit the thread
11   Start the user process by simulating a return from an interrupt, transferring control to the loaded program.
12.  End of the start_process function.
```

`process_start()` handles pre-parsing the user program arguments as tokens into a list and then sending those arguments to another program load. Depending on what load returns back the child thread will either exit or set the interrupt to give the user program control. 

##### int process_wait(tid_t child_tid) 
```
1.  Begin executing the process_wait function.
2.  Check if the child list is empty to ensure this thread isn't waiting on nothing. If empty, return an error code (-1).
3.  Check if the child has even loaded. 
4.  Check if the child being waited on is part of the waiting child list, If not, return an error code (-1).
5.  Set the child for which we are waiting from the function parameter.
6.  If the child has not finished yet, wait for it to finish its program to avoid killing it prematurely.
7.  If waiting, block the current parent thread until the child finishes.
8.  Retrieve the return value of the child.
10. Once the child is done, remove it from the child list and free its memory.
11. Return the return value of the child to the caller.
12. End of the process_wait function.
```

`process_wait()` is like the daycare waiting room for the parent thread. Normally a prent thread enters this from `process_execcute()` or a system call `SYS_ECEC` (which leads to the same previous function). Once a parent thread enters `process_wait()` it checks if the child thread is still in its list, if it isnt it returns something wrong happened. Then it checks if the child thread was able to load its program, if it didnt then it returns something wrong has happened. Next the parent searches for the child to get its return value later (hear about the child threads day in daycare). Then the parent thread waits on the specific child thread it was told to wait on when it enterted `process_wait()` with the semaphore `sem_child_wait`. Once the child thread releases the parent thread it returns the child threads return value.



##### void process_exit(void) 
```
1. Begin executing the process_exit() function. 
2. Print the name of the thread wanting to exit and its exit_status. 
3. Destroy all children threads until the list is empty.
4. Destroy our current threads process page and switch to the kernel page.
5. End of process_exit().
```

`process_exit()` is very simple, print the current threads name and exit status. Kill all the children. Destroy our user virtual memory page and head back to the kernel one, then exit. 


##### bool load (const char *file_name, void (**eip) (void), void **esp, char **user_args, int arg_count) 
```
1. Begin executing the load function.
2. Allocate and activate the page directory.
3. Open executable file (if failed to return).
4. Verify executable headers.
5. Read program headers.
6. Setup stack (only change I added was user_args and arg_count).
7. Start address.
8. If we failed along the way close the file otherwise return success and end process_load().
```

`load()` is responsible for loading the program executables items and then calling the `setup_stack()` function to do most of the busy work. 

##### static bool setup_stack(void **esp, char **user_args, int arg_count)
```
1. Install the page into users virtual address space.
2. Initalize the stack pointer to PHYS_BASE (top of the user virtual memory address space).
3. Create an array to hold the addresses of the user program arguments.
4. Push the addresses of the user program arguments onto the user virtual memory space.
5. Word align the stack pointer.
6. Push the addresses of argv[0] and argc onto the stack.
7. Push a fake return address onto the stack.
8. Free the allocated ptr addresses.
9. End of setup_stack function. 
```

`setup_stack()` does exactly as the name entails, it sets up the stack for the user program arguments. It does this by pushing the addresses of the user arguments onto the stack, then some other stuff as required by the setup instructions. Finally, returns back to `load()` to finish up the rest of the work.


### 3) Synchronization
##### sem_child_load
```
- Parent thread/process synchronization.
1. Create child thread/process in thread_create().
2. Wait on child thread to finish loading its program with sem_child_load.
3. Once child thread finishes attempting to load either kill it if it failed or return normally.

- Child thread/process synchronization.
1. Start in start_process once the parent thread finished creating us the child thread.
2. Parse the user argument stuff as needed.
3. Load the user argument(s).
4. Once loaded report back to the parent if we the child thread succeed or not .
5. Release the parent thread waiting on sem_child_load.
6. Depending on our success loading either continue to setup the stack or thread_exit(). 
```

The first major synchronization `process.c` is between the parent thread waiting on the child thread to attempt to load. The parent thread will create the child thread and send it to `start_process()`. There the child thread will setup the user arguments and attempt to load them. If the child thread fails to load the user arguments it will tell the parent this through a internal pointer to the parent `struct thread` to `child_loaded` flag. If the child thread failed to load it will release the parent thread waiting on `sem_child_load` and then exit. If the child thread is successful in loading it will continue to setup its stack while the parent thread moves onto its second semaphore `sem_child_wait` in `process_wait()`. 


##### sem_child_wait
```
- Parent thread/process synchronization.
1. Parent thread checks if the child thread is still alive and active, if not it will exit. 
2. If the child thread is still alive it will wait on sem_child_wait.
3. Once the child thread is finished and tells the parent thread on sem_child_wait it will take the. 
child threads return value and return it.

- Child thread/process synchronization.
1. When the child thread enters SYS_CALL exit it will move to SYS_EXIT exit() function.
2. The child thread will find its own internal data structure to the parent if one exits.
3. Report to the parent its current status and that it is done.
4. If the thread finds that its parent thread is waiting on them (checking child_waiting to current threads tid) 
it will release the parent thread waiting on sem_child_wait
```

This synchronization is done to let the parent thread wait on its child thread to finish its program. This is doen through the `sem_child_wait` semaphore. The parent thread will wait on specific tid that was passed as a function parameter. Evantually the child thread will check if its parent thread is waiting on them to finish, if it is the child thread will release the parent after giving the parent thread the exit status info it wants. 



### 4) Justification

For `process.c` we decided to do pre-processing of the user arguments first as we saw it more simple to implement than dynamic `strtok_r` calls while also checking we dont go over the `4kb` limit. It also helped with setting up the stack in `setup_stack()` as the `argv` and `argc` were already ready to be pushed to the stack. This lead to simplier code to read and understand, plus fewer complex lines in `setup_stack()`. Also there is no wasted processing flooding the stack with user arguments without knowing if there are too many in the first place. 

The only other major change is the use of semaphores. Keith implemented the semaphores mostly because it was what he was most comfortable with with from CSE 130 Operating Systems and had a preference to how clean they can be to use. For this problem the semaphores are very simple too and easy to understand which was a major benefit for their implementation. By starting the semaphores as DOWN initially whatever thread calls them is initially blocked and just sits around waiting for a child thread to say "hey! wake up", once the child thread has finished its task. 



## System Calls

### 1) Data structures created/extended


When implementing these functions, the file-processing related syscalls utilized PintOS's filesys functions in the filesys.h file. 

An example syscall we have implemented is the remove() syscall function:
##### from syscall.c
```
bool remove(const char *file) {
  // Deletes the file
  debug_printf("remove(): removing!");
  if (file == NULL) {
    return -1;
  }

  lock_acquire(&file_lock);
  bool result = filesys_remove(file);
  lock_release(&file_lock);
  return result;
}
```

Where the syscall function follows the pattern of checking: certain conditions (eg. if file is null, fd is 1 or 0, etc), then using the corresponding filesys function (ensuring to use a lock).


The syscall functions and their corresponding PintOS file functions: 
- remove() -> filesys_remove()
- open() -> filesys_open()
- close -> file_close()
- seek() -> file_seek()
- tell() -> file_tell()
- filesize() -> file_length()
- write() -> file_write()
- read() -> file_read()

It important to note that these syscalls -- write, read, seek, filesize, tell, and close -- utilize a file locating helper function called **locate_file(int fd)** (explained in User Memory section), where it initializes a file instance struct that contains the file descriptor's file pointer, that gets passed into their file_""() function.

Functions such as open() are a bit more involved, and are discussed in the algorithms section.

### 2) Algorithms

For the syscall_handler() function, the switch-case serves as a simple algorithm.

#### Open()
The **open()** syscall algorithm followed these steps:
- Acquiring the file lock, opening the file via filesys_open(), then releasing the lock.
```
lock_acquire(&file_lock);
struct file *file_p = filesys_open(file);
lock_release(&file_lock);
```
- Allocate memory (via malloc()) for a new file element and instantiate the struct file_inst (always checking if the result is NULL!).
```struct file_inst *file_elem = malloc(sizeof(struct file_inst));```
- Then we start filling in the file_inst struct
```
// Initialize file element
file_elem->fd = ++thread_current()->fd_ct;
file_elem->file_p = file_p;
```
- Importantly pushing the entire file's list-element in to the thread's file-list.
```
list_push_front(&thread_current()->list_files,&file_elem->file_list_e);
```
- Lastly returning the file descriptor
```
return file_elem->fd;
```

#### Write()

The **write()** syscall algorithm followed these steps:
- Check if the fd is intended for console writes (fd = 1). If so, write to console via putbuf.
```
if (fd == STDOUT_FILENO) {
putbuf(buffer, size);
return size;
}
```
- Using our helpful function, get the file's pointer from the file_inst struct. (Ensure to check if NULL!)
```
struct file_inst * fd_e = locate_file(fd);

```
- Acquiring the file lock, and pass the file pointer into file_write(), then release the lock.
```
lock_acquire(&file_lock);
int result = file_write(fd_e->file_p, buffer, size);
lock_release(&file_lock);
```
- Lastly returning the number of bytes written
```
return result;
```

#### Read()

Read() follows a very similar algorithm to write() in regards to handling the file descriptor (fd) that isn't a standard I/O -- instead using **file_read()**

However read does continue taking keyboard input when fd is zero.
```
// check if keyboard input, as fd = 0 for user writes.
int cur_len = 0;
if (fd == 0) {
// continue taking keyboard input
while (cur_len < STDIN_FILENO) {
  *((char *) buffer + cur_len) = input_getc();
  cur_len++;
}
return cur_len;
}
```


### 3) Synchronization

As for good practice, when ever doing any file reads/writes I added a file lock to prevent race-conditions -- as discussed earlier in n

### 4) Justification

In the syscall_handler, we utilized a switch-case data structure as it allowed us to use the enum syscall values that were defined in syscall-nr.h. This made it convenient to use as well over a bunch of if-statements.

The write() function uses putbuf(), as we felt using PintOS's own sort of printf() seemed more inline with the system's design. It also passes the tests for us.

## Process Termination Message

### 1) Data structures created/extended


#### Page fault terminations

A big challenge during testing was the "bad-___" tests, where we encountered page faults.

We modifed the page_fault() function in exception.c, reusing the same thread-exit code that we implemented earlier in syscall's exit() function where we can correctly set an exit status of -1 to the thread, along with handling our own thread parent & child synchronization. The added code is near the bottom, where we commented out some stuff that PintOS provided.

##### From exception.c
```
static void
page_fault (struct intr_frame *f) 
{

  ...
  [shortened code]
  ...
  /* To implement virtual memory, delete the rest of the function
     body, and replace it with code that brings in the page to
     which fault_addr refers. */
  // printf ("Page fault at %p: %s error %s page in %s context.\n",
  //         fault_addr,
  //         not_present ? "not present" : "rights violation",
  //         write ? "writing" : "reading",
  //         user ? "user" : "kernel");
  
  thread_current()->exit_status = -1;
  thread_current()->parent->child_done = 1; 
  if(thread_current()->parent->child_waiting == thread_current()->tid){
    // If the parent thread is waiting on us, release them
    sema_up(&thread_current()->parent->sem_child_wait); 
  }
  
  thread_exit();
  // kill (f);
}

```



### 2) Algorithms
- Removed some print statements
### 3) Synchronization
N/A
### 4) Justification

We simpily removed some of the print statements and the behavior when a page faults happens to cause a exit to happen instead. This was a efficient way to stop page faults from causing programs to stall and allow threads to move onto the next thing.

#### Page fault modifications
We decided on editing the exception.c file's page_fault() function, mainly because we spent hours trying other implementations that did not prevent these page files. In addition, the function's header comment literally states "Some solutions to project 2 may also require modifying this code."

## User Memory

### 1) Data structures created/extended

#### Virtual address

##### bool valid_addr(void *vaddr) 
```
bool valid_addr(void *vaddr) {
      // Check if the virtual address is not a null pointer
    if (vaddr == NULL) {
        debug_printf("Nonetype vaddr\n");
        return false;
    }

    // Check if the virtual address is in the user address space
    if (!is_user_vaddr(vaddr)) {
        debug_printf("invalid vaddr\n");
        return false;
    }

    // Check if the page is valid    
    if (pagedir_get_page(thread_current()->pagedir, vaddr) == NULL) {
        debug_printf("Invalid vaddr page\n");
        return false;
    }

    // Return true otherwise
    debug_extra_printf("No issue found in vaddr\n");
    return true;
}
```
```
bool valid_str(char *str){
    // Check if the str is in the user address space
    if (!is_user_vaddr(str)) {
        debug_printf("invalid str addr\n");
        return false;
    }

    // Check if the string is in the correct page
    char *page_str = pagedir_get_page(thread_current()->pagedir, (void *) str);
    if(page_str == NULL){
      // Checking if the first part is in the correct page
      debug_printf("invalid str page NULL\n");
      return false;
    }else{
      // Checking if the last part + null terminator is in the correct page
      char *end_str = str + strlen(page_str) + 1;
      if (!is_user_vaddr(end_str) || pagedir_get_page(thread_current()->pagedir, end_str) == NULL) {
        debug_extra_printf("invalid str end page or vaddr\n");
        return false;
  	  }
    }
    // Otherwise return true
    debug_extra_printf("No issue found in str\n");
    return true;
}
```

In syscall.c, we added a function that checks whether the passed in user address is valid -- called **valid_addr**, returning a bool value. 

#### Locating files helper struct & function
Since many system calls deal with locating and processing files, we created a struct called file_inst (file instance) that stores the file pointer, file descriptor, and the file's list element -- using the PintOS provided list data structures. Along with a corresponding struct generating helper function that importantly locates the file from its file descriptor.

The thread.c **init_thread()** function has been extended to initialize the list data structure.   ```list_init(&t->list_files);```
Also added the  thread's file descriptor count (fd_ct) in **thread_create()**
```
t->fd_ct = 1;

/* Add to run queue. */
thread_unblock (t);

return tid;
}
```

##### from syscall.h
```
struct file_inst
{
  // set file pointer
  struct file * file_p;
  // file descriptor
  int fd;
  // list element
  struct list_elem file_list_e;
};
```

##### from syscall.c
```
struct file_inst *locate_file (int fd) {
  // get current thread
  struct thread * cur = thread_current();
  struct list_elem * list_e;

  // iterate through list of files until locate correct file descriptor element
  for (list_e = list_begin(&cur->list_files); list_e != list_end(&cur->list_files); list_e = list_next(list_e)) {
    struct file_inst * fd_e = list_entry(list_e, struct file_inst, file_list_e);
    if (fd_e->fd == fd) {
      return fd_e;
    }
  }

  debug_printf("locate_file(): returned NULL!\n");

  return NULL;
}
```

Side Note: we created a toggleable printf (debug_printf) to make our debugging lives easier.

### 2) Algorithms

The only algorithm is going through the if statements in `valid_addr` which checks that a addr is in the user virtual memory address space and the page too. The second algorithm is `valid_str` which is an two if statements, first checking the string is in user memory address space then the end of the string aswell is in the user memory address space aswell as the table.


#### Virtual address
A fairly straightforward algorithm to handle buggy or malicious processes, where checks if the address is:
- A null pointer
- Is within the user addres space
- If the thread's page is valid
- Otherwise return true

#### Locate_file algorithm
Regarding the locate_file struct, it contains a relatively simple algorithm that essentially cycle's through the current thread's entire list of files until it locates the matching file descriptor element.

### 3) Synchronization
```
struct lock file_lock;
struct lock process_lock;
```

Two locks were added to syscall.h to handle synchronization between the system calling threads. 

The process_lock was utilized in the exec() syscall when executing processes.

The file_lock is heavily used when calling any filesys.h functions, as to prevent race-conditions.

For the file_inst struct, since it only deals with the current thread's memory, there wasn't any notable designs for synchronization.

### 4) Justification

#### Use of valid_addr
Having this function has proven invaluable when developing our syscall file. As it allowed us to return a exit(-1) signal for any bad pointers or addresses passed in. It was utilized in basically every system call.

#### Locate_file justification 
The reason for adding this file struct, is to serve as a convenient getter function to locate the thread's files from its memory. It had tons of utilization as it was used to implement these syscalls: write, read, seek, filesize, tell, and close.
